Protocols for Trawl Catch and Abundance data from the 2020 Gulf of Alaska International Year of the Salmon Expedition

Trawl operations

Trawl sets conducted using the NPAFC 1142 research trawl net with a 3 mm codend mesh size. This
new net was built to have an opening similar to the RT 80/396 trawl (10 mm codend mesh) net used
by northwest Pacific high-sea research in Russia and used during the 2019 GoA expedition and the
net fished by NOAA in coastal surveys in Alaska that is proposed to be used by the US team in the
2021 expedition (NPAFC Doc. 1922 (Rev. 1)). The net was designed to be fishable from the
Canadian new research vessel CCGS Sir John Franklin. The net was constructed with support of the
IYS research plan for 2021 surveys. To keep the effective trawl opening near the surface, two large
floats (72 cm in diameter each) were attached to the headrope with two pairs of smaller floats
(39 cm in diameter each) attached to the wing tips. To increase the vertical opening of the net, two
chains (272 kg) were attached to the footrope. Thyboron type 15 trawl doors (4.5 m2 and 1135 kg
each) were attached to the trawl via 46 m door legs rigged in a configuration to sustain horizontal
opening. Declared opening of this net (according to supplementary documentation) was 45.7 m in
horizontal and 30 m in vertical directions. The actual vertical opening (measured using 2 RBR
sensors attached to both head- and footrope) was typically 18–22 m during surface sets and 8–10 m
during deep sets (at 30 m headrope depth). 

Where repeated high salmon catches were encountered during a surface set, a deeper set was also
carried out to increase the number of samples. Three deep sets were performed over the course of
the expedition.

Throughout the survey, the average calculated horizontal opening range was 42–45 m for surface
sets and 50–51 m for deep sets; average trawling speed was 4.9–5.2 knots; warp length averaged
245 m for surface trawls and 391 m for deeper sets; averaged swept area using estimated horizontal
opening was 0.40 km2 for surface trawls and 0.43 km2 for deeper trawls; trawl mouth opening
averaged 650 m2 for surface trawls and 394 m2 for deeper trawls; filtered volume averaged 6.1*10-3
km3 for surface trawls and 3.5*10-3 km3 for deeper trawls.
For comparison, during 2019 expedition averaged technical trawl parameters were the following:
horizontal opening - 38.4 m, vertical opening - 32.2 m, speed - 4.4 knots, warps - 250 m, swept area - 0.31 km2, trawl mouth opening - 969 m2 and filtered volume - 7.8*10-3 km3.Technical parameters
of each trawl are represented in table 4.

-----------------
Catch processing

All salmon and bycatch species were processed immediately following each trawl. All salmon were
identified to species, fitted with a floy tag on the caudal peduncle (to identify the specimen) and
measured for fork length, standard length, and weight. Numerous samples were taken from each
salmon: fin clips for genetic analysis; scales for ageing and growth rate; otoliths for ageing and early
marine growth, checking for hatcheries marks and tags; muscle samples for energy density, lipids,
stable isotopes, fatty acid analyses and stomachs for diet analysis. A subsample of the salmon catch
(up to 15 specimens per species per trawl) was processed for fish health diagnostics. Non-salmon
nekton species were identified, enumerated, measured, and a subsample was frozen or preserved in
formaldehyde for subsequent laboratory analyses in Canada and Russia. Micronekton (mesopelagic
fish, squid) and jellyfishes were identified to the species level, counted, measured, weighed, and a
subset preserved for subsequent lab analyses.

-------------------------------------
Trawl bycatch and salmon biogeochemistry sampling

Muscle samples for stable isotope and fatty acid analyses were collected from up to 100 individuals
per salmon species per set. Stable isotope samples were preserved in a -20°C freezer and the fatty
acid samples were preserved on dry ice.
Stable isotope and fatty acid samples were also collected from most bycatch species from most
trawls. If individuals were small (< 20 cm), up to 10 individuals from each size class from a trawl
were collected for isotopes and up to five individuals from each size class were collected for fatty
acid analysis. If individuals were large (= 20 cm), a piece of the muscle was taken for isotope and
/or fatty acid analyses. Isotope samples were preserved in the -20 °C freezer and fatty acid samples
were preserved on dry ice.
Samples of non-gelatinous micronekton were collected for all common species for traits analysis
(morphological traits - body shape and size, categorized behavioral traits – diel vertical migration).
Up to 10 individuals per species were preserved in the -20 °C freezer. 

----------------------------
Salmon and nekton abundance estimations

Total salmon and nekton abundance and biomass were calculated using the formula:
N (B) = Q *S / 1,000,000
where N, B is the number and biomass of species (thousand tons and million fish); Q is the average
distribution density of species within the survey area (individuals or kg per km2
); and S is the survey
area (km2
). The distribution density index Q is calculated using number and weight of each
individual species in the given catch (n or b), the trawl swept area (s), and the catchability
coefficient of the species (k) according to the formula: q = n (b) / k * s. For more details on the
applied method see two technical reports (Volvenko 1999, Volvenko 2000). Catchability
coefficients for major nekton species are presented in a series of Atlases issued by the TINROCenter (Shuntov, Bocharov et al. 2003) and will need to be adapted to the survey on the Pacific
Legacy. Given the 3 mm mesh size in the NPAFC 1142 trawl codend, catchability coefficients for
individuals less than 2 cm in length (e.g. squid juveniles, myctophids) were restricted to 0.1 (Table
3). Trawl catchability coefficient for maturing and immature Pacific salmon aged n.1+ or older was
0.3, and most juvenile salmon in their first marine year had a catchability coefficient of 0.4.
However, quickly growing Pink salmon and Coho salmon spending one year at sea had a trawl
catchability coefficient equal to 0.3 (Table 1). 


